Welcome back everyone to part two of our lecture series on timestamps and extract where we focus on
extracting time and date information as well as formatting it so we're going to be exploring how to
extract information from time based data types using the extract function as well as using the H function.
And then we'll also learn about formatting time information using the to care or two character functionality
so let's start with extract which allows you to extract or obtain a sub component of a date value and
you're allowed to extract the year month day week and quarter.
You can always check out the sequel documentation for more information on this.
But basically what this does is if you have a full timestamp and you only want the year component of
it you can extract just the year.
So the usage would look something like this.
You would say extract and then in parentheses you pass into the extract function the subcomponents you
want to extract and we put it in all caps just so it's clear to whoever is reading this that we are
extracting the year and then we'll say from and then whatever date column we're trying to extract this
from the H function calculates and returns the current age given a timestamp.
So you simply just passin some timestamp column into the H function and they'll return something that
looks like this thirteen years one month five days.
And if you also have time information it'll include our minutes and seconds et cetera.
So what that's doing is it's just taking the current date that you are querying and then calculating
how old the timestamp in the actual database is.
So if something if let's say the year was 20 20 and you had a timestamp from the year 2000 then it would
return back 20 years.
So just calculating how old is that particular timestamp given when you're actually querying it.
So just it's age and then finally this to care or to character functionality is just a general function
to convert data types to text and it's actually not explicitly used just for timestamps.
You can use this on lots of different use cases but it's very useful for timestamp formatting in particular.
And we're gonna go and explore the documentation a little further when we actually work through some
examples.
But basically the usage of this is you say to underscore care and then inside this two character function
you're going to type in as a first parameter the date column name and then comma and then as a string
parameter the text formatting you want.
And notice there's going to be specialized codes as far as how you actually want to format the month
days years et cetera.
And we're going to be exploring the documentation to see a full table of the different template formatting
for that so all these functions are really best understood through example.
So let's jump straight to PS Yasmin and work with these functions as well as explore documentation for
translating a timestamp to a character string.
All right here I am at my query editor but I'm going to do is I'm going to select everything from the
payment table just so we can explore it once again and notice that all the way at the end we had this
payment date which is a timestamp without a time zone let's start going through a couple of functions
we just learned about the first one being the extract function.
So the way this works is we'll separate the two lines.
We say select and then we extract parentheses.
And here we get to decide what we actually want to extract.
So if we wanted to extract just a year from that payment they will say a year from and then we type
in that timestamp column name and those what we get back we're getting back a certain part of that date
and then we get back 2007 and it's really useful to use this along with the alias in order to say something
like as and you can call this like my year run this and then you get my year so you could also say year
run that and you get back here.
Notice that year is highlighted here because it is technically a specialized keyword of sequel because
it can be used as a sub component to extract from a date.
So here again typically you're going to select extract select something to extract such as the month
from payment dates and then call it let's say pay month or whatever you want to actually call this column
and then you see pay month.
And here's the second month.
So these all happened in February et cetera.
You can do it for all the ones you mentioned such as quarter as well.
Start typing these on multiple lines run this.
And so this happens in the first quarter of the year because it was February the first quarters January
February and March.
So we can see here this payment happened in the first quarter.
Very useful for things like business.
Okay.
So we have the extract functionality in place.
Let's say you wanted to figure out how old a particular time stamp date was in regards to our current
dates.
To do that we simply say select and if we say payment date.
Notice here we have that time stamp again.
The H function if we take a look at it it's going to allow us to calculate how old this particular timestamp
is.
So for example if something or someone was born on this particular date timestamp How old will it be
right now.
And obviously you'll get different results because you won't run this at the exact same time I will.
So if I run this here I get to see the age and it's 13 years one month five days and then hours minutes
seconds and then sub seconds.
All right.
So that is the age functionality.
And then finally the one I want to show you in a little more detail is to character.
It's the way this works is we say to underscore character then we decide on the timestamp column we're
going to be working with we say comma.
And then as a string code you get to decide on the formatting.
And as I mentioned to character is it's a generalized function for converting from one data type into
a text data type.
And if we take a look at the documentation for this which is under data type formatting functions or
if you just google search to underscore c h a r you'll get used to this page and a zoom interest a little
more so we can read this.
And basically what this allows us to do is as a function grab some data type and then convert it to
a text data type.
So typically you can see the first one here is you graph and timestamp and you convert it to a string
and there's gonna be specialized template formatting codes.
So if you scroll down here notice there's different patterns you can use in essentially these are the
specialized patterns.
You can combine in any way you want in order to organize the text however you see fit.
So notice if you just say one single y that's the last digit of the year to capitalize is the last two
digits 3 and then 4 etc. You can also do things like have capitalized month which is the full uppercase
month name or if you just say all lowercase M O and it's the abbreviated lowercase so three characters
in English funding if you're on a localized version of your language it may vary etc. But notice there's
lots of different ways you can ask for the month.
So let's go ahead and play around with this.
So we see here that we have a timestamp.
Let's go ahead and format it to be month dash y y y y.
So we run this and because we have month in full caps it's going to report back February.
This dash is just the dash that I decided to use there.
So if I remove that Dash and just have a bunch of spaces run this again then the string code is just
gonna have some spaces between month and these four capitalize.
So keep in mind.
Now I can add in whatever string text or characters I want in order to format my date as I so choose.
So let's imagine that you are running something from United States and somebody asks you for a report
on this payment date organized let's say by month then day then year.
So what you can do here is let's take a look at the documentation here.
We're gonna go ahead and use let's say all lowercase m o n so say all lowercase m o n forward slash
and then if you take a look at the table you can get the dates just as two numbers with lowercase d
and then we'll go ahead and just have why is there.
So we run this and we get back February 15th 2007 and then on second thought you think look kind of
weird to have the three letters so you come back in the documentation you see here M M is a month number
which probably makes more sense.
So we'll come back here and replace this with m m run them.
And now I see 0 to 15 2007 and these forward slash dashes are just forward slashes that I got to decide
on if I wanted to I could have made these just normal dashes run this and know how my string is going
to keep getting edited.
Now let's imagine we're running this query from a European standpoint and we actually want to have the
formatting be correct for European standards in which case I would have the day first and then come
in with the month another dash and then have the year and notice how that starts get flipped around.
OK.
So a lot of this is just looking up here in this large table exactly the template pattern for your date
time formatting.
Again it's a large table but you should be able to find whatever you're looking for and then you can
add in your own strings or own characters in order to format it.
However you see fit.
So that is the two character function.
And as I mentioned later on we'll see that it's actually able to format not just timestamps but a variety
of different things.
So you can format an integer to be a string.
So converting it to a string and then maybe only show certain precision levels.
OK so that's it for this lecture I will see you at the next one.